---
title: Setting The Goals
weight: 300
---

# Setting The Goals

Honest Security is an approach designed to help organizations achieve two
distinct goals: educating employees about security, and dramatically improving
adherence to the security team’s recommendations and compliance objectives.

## Tricking Users Isn't Training Them

In your organization, your team might employ tools and programs with the same
goals in mind. Perhaps your organization even lists honesty, transparency, and
ownership as its company values. On the education side, there are many products
that allow you to create interactive training modules for employees. Despite
their incredible graphics and engaging voice acting (not), these programs fail
to deliver the information when it’s most beneficial for the trainee to hear it,
at the point of performance. Other educational tools like the ones used to train
people to identify phishing emails _do_ deliver the training at the point of
performance (right after the user is fooled by a phish) but can only do this by
expending considerable effort attempting to fool, entrap, and subsequently
humiliate their potential students into demonstrating their lack of knowledge.
That’s not a great way to build up a working relationship.

## 100% Compliance Is Impossible With Automation Alone

On the compliance side, the existing approaches aren’t much better. Products
exist which allow you, with a single click, to remotely change all the settings
of a device in order to match the recommendations for a given compliance
standard. Unfortunately, these tools do not consider nor care about the
end-user’s experience, nor do they take into account the context of their
current environment. If a compliance standard advocates that bluetooth should be
disabled in high-risk situations like when the user is in public spaces or
traveling, then the compliance tool’s only option is to disable the bluetooth
for all devices, permanently, no exceptions. Need bluetooth for 10 minutes so
you can join a conference call on your Mac with your Airpods? Too bad. That’s
how the hackers get in.

## Why Honest Security Is a Better Fit

Honest Security helps achieve both of these goals better than the existing
approaches because it believes that communicating directly with the individual
who is using a device is the key to solving these problems.

As we will see in the Honest Security for Education section of this guide, we
can use honest data collection techniques to deliver contextual and personalized
recommendations (not alerts or failures) to end-users at the point of
performance. No humiliation is required!

In the section entitled Honest Security for Compliance, we will explore how
generating predictable and proportional consequences increases the adherence to
important recommendations from the security team. The techniques described in
this section can even drive actions like users voluntarily opting in to managed
profiles.

But before we can do either of these things, our Honest Security program needs
to be able to know some things about your organization, your users, and the
devices they use, and we need to obtain this knowledge honestly.
