---
title: Collecting Data Honestly
weight: 400
---

# Collecting Data Honestly

## The Big Question

Let’s start with a question I typically ask end-users.

Do you know **if** your organization **looks** at your web browser history?

I want to clarify that I am not asking them whether or not the company collects
web browsing history. I am asking them whether they _know_, with 100% certainty,
whether the security team is or is not. It is one thing to know whether your
organization _can_ view your browsing history, and another to know _if_ they do.
Also notice I didn’t ask them if the organization _usually_ looks. One person,
looking once because they were curious, _is looking_.

After making these clarifications, it is my experience that there are three
camps of people who can still emphatically answer “yes.”


### The Three Camps Who Say "Yes"

The first camp are the folks that definitely know they are being surveilled.
They know because they have seen their peers reprimanded or even fired because
of their web browsing history. In these organizations, the leadership is all too
proud to communicate the veracity and insidiousness of the surveillance because
they see it as a deterrent to people slacking off, stealing from the company,
and other assumed nefarious activities their so-called “trusted” employees might
be getting up to.

The second camp are the folks who know they are not being surveilled because the
company has no security or IT tools or policies. On their first day they opened
up their laptop, fresh out of the packaging, and did not have to install any
company mandated security tools, management profiles, or agents. They work from
home on their own Wi-FI, and they never need to connect on a VPN. The great
irony here is that these users might be ignorant there are capabilities like
Apple’s Device Enrollment Program (DEP) that are able to put Macs under
management fresh out of the packaging directly from Apple’s warehouse!

The third camp are the folks who can answer “yes”, because they know exactly
what tools are installed on their devices and what the tools are capable of
collecting. More importantly, they know they can _independently verify_ how the
security and IT team is using these tools in practice. They know if the security
team is looking at their web browser history because the tools the security team
uses _require_ them to know. These are people who work for companies that
practice Honest Security.


### The Folks Who Say "No"
But what about the most common case, when end-users answer “no?” If you don’t
know if your organization looks at your web browser history, why don’t you know?
How can you find out? Who do you reach out to to find the answer? Do you feel
empowered to ask these questions without reprisal?

If you pushed your organization to adopt Honest Security, this conversation will
be easy to have. If it hasn’t, then users are stuck in the dark, not knowing
what tools and security practices are being used on devices. You may discount
the psychic toll this has on end-users, but it’s very real and it can negatively
influence their behaviors and decisions, in the same ways excessive surveillance
can when implemented at a nation-state scale.


## Informed Consent

Informed consent is a term used by the medical community. In the United States
(and likely abroad), if you’ve ever undergone even a minor procedure that
carries some risk, a medical professional likely walked you through those risks,
even if their probability is infinitesimally small. Not only did they do this
verbally, they likely gave you a printed document that could not be adulterated
by the medical staff.

Practicing informed consent in medicine is obviously the right thing to do, but
it’s not something that organically came to be. Its codification into Federal
law is the result of hard won litigation by people permanently harmed by medical
procedures where they felt they were not adequately informed about the risks.
Before informed consent, those infinitesimally small risks were buried in legal
documents with 8pt font. If discussed verbally, they were diminished by doctors
pushing for specific outcomes that they thought were best. While withholding
information may feel like you are just making choices clearer for people, it’s
essentially lying by omission, and this approach was dishonest enough that laws
needed to be created to protect people from harm.

Switching back to modern endpoint security, the lack of informed consent
continues to be a key feature. Security team members feel that the statement in
their employment agreement, or the one bullet on slide 34 of last year’s
security training powerpoint are sufficient forms of consent.

In Honest Security, informed consent should take place in moments when there's a
chance lack of consent could damage the trust between the end-users and the
security team. An example of a situation where consent should always be obtained
is the deployment of software that collects facts about user devices. As benign
as these facts may be, users have the right to understand and control this
process.

### Example: Onboarding
Kolide’s product obtains this consent process through an enrollment workflow in
Slack (pictured below).

![The Kolide onboarding workflow using Slack](/images/onboarding-example.png)

You’ll notice a few things here. We aren’t rolling out the endpoint security
software silently in the background and informing users after the fact. When
embracing a consent based approach, the end-users are the ones who actually
download and install the package. They feel in control because they are in
control.

There are some additional situations that Honest Security requires consent for
each instance. These include the following:

*   viewing or transmitting the Geolocation of a device,
*   reading the contents of files in the user’s directory,
*   and remote-locking/erasing personally owned devices.

While these situations are obvious choices to require consent, your organization
may feel they aren’t enough. The consent requirements should be fine-tuned with
input from the privacy sensitive individuals of your organization, the above
only represents the minimum bar that every organization should reach.


## Transparency

It’s not practical or healthy to ask for informed consent for every single
action. Imagine having surgery and you having to consent to every move they are
going to make, every medical device they are going to use, and review every
possible contingency plan. This is a waste of everyone’s time and creates
permission fatigue that results in the blanket consent for any task.

Where informed consent is inappropriate, transparency is essential. Many
security products feature audit logs, but those audit logs are rarely readily
accessible to end-users who stand to lose the most when a bad-actor abuses their
access to their work device. In order for the automatic accountability of
transparency to apply, it must be consistently applied to all mechanisms
available to obtain data.

### Example: A Privacy Center

At Kolide, all users have access to a Privacy Center that allows them to
scrutinize how the access they consented to earlier is being used by the various
members of the security and IT teams.

![The Kolide Privacy Center](/images/kolide-privacy-center.png)

In the absence of transparency, some of your more worried users are left to
assume the worst, that the access is being abused or that they are being
unfairly monitored. Can you blame them? In the post COVID-19 era, the news is
littered with human interest stories about evil bosses abusing computer
management and IT software to spy on their employees.

As many security teams know, the reality is much more boring. Why not show them
the truth? It makes everyone (including the security team) feel at ease.


## The Insider Threat

The most common argument I see against transparency is that it gives bad-actors
within your organization an advantage. The rationale is that an insider threat
might be able to identify gaps in the security team’s detection capabilities and
systematically abuse them to complete their mission. I disagree. As we all know
security through obscurity rarely works. Also, it’s much more likely that this
transparency and regular contact will instead serve as a deterrent. Unlike
end-users who are making unforced errors, malicious insiders are afraid of being
caught. The more interactions they have with a team practicing Honest Security,
the more uncomfortable they will get.

Part of Honest Security is trusting end-users because they are our colleagues.
If you build a dystopian and cynical security program born out of fear,
mistrust, and suspicion, then you will inevitably make your fellow-employees
your enemies. The positive working relationship we are advocating for in this
guide cannot exist under such a program. Only you can judge if that trade-off is
ultimately worthwhile.


## The Importance of Ground Truth

In order for Honest Security to function properly, it must have highly accurate
facts about devices, organizations, and most importantly people. These ground
truths allow Honest Security to _confidently_ make _correct_ security
decisions/assertions and deliver them to the right people.

The “ground” in ground truth indicates it is information provided via direct
observation by a trusted solution. This is necessary for several reasons:



1. **Accuracy** of the data is essential to the Honest Security mission. Honest
   Security practitioners must be able to immediately and directly correct any
   inaccuracies. It is unacceptable for the system to draw incorrect conclusions
   from bad data sources. Relying on substandard data puts the credibility of
   Honest Security at risk.
2. As mentioned earlier, in order to be honest, ground truth must be collected
   with **informed** **consent**. Dishonest security solutions do not care if
   their data sets are ill-gotten as they never rationalize data collection with
   end-users.
3. Honest Security should be accessible for businesses at _any_ stage to
   implement. Increasing the **total cost of ownership** for early stage
   businesses by forcing them to buy additional products to power Honest
   Security’s core mission is unacceptable.

In the absence of these positive guiding principles, dishonest security looks to
amass as much data as possible, in unfounded preparation that its value can be
fully realized later.

Honest Security asserts that the list of ground truth to collect is _solely_
driven by the needs of the education and compliance mission. This assures that
Honest Security solutions can always fully explain to an end-user why specific
data is needed and how it is used.
